Project 4: Shared Storage Between Containers

OBJECTIVE

The objective of this project is to learn how multiple Docker containers can share and access the same data using a Docker Volume.

TECHNOLOGIES USED

Docker
Ubuntu Image
Docker Volumes

PROJECT OVERVIEW

In this project, two Ubuntu containers were connected to the same Docker volume. Files created and modified in one container were immediately visible in the other container, demonstrating shared storage and multi-container interaction.

STEPS PERFORMED

1. Create a Docker Volume

A Docker volume named "shared-notes" was created to store shared data.

2. Create Container 1

A container was started and the shared volume was mounted inside the container.

3. Create Container 2

A second container was started using the same volume.

4. Create a Shared File

Inside Container 1, a file named "shared-note.txt" was created.

5. Verify from Container 2

The file was accessed from Container 2, confirming that both containers could read the same data.

6. Modify the File

Container 2 appended additional content to the file.

7. Verify Changes

Container 1 successfully viewed the updated content, proving that both containers were using the same shared storage.

8. Create Additional Files

container1.txt was created from Container 1.

container2.txt was created from Container 2.

Both files were visible from both containers.

9. Test Persistence

The containers were removed and recreated using the same Docker volume. All files remained available, confirming data persistence.

COMMANDS USED

Create Volume

docker volume create shared-notes

Run Container 1

docker run -it --name container1 -v shared-notes:/opt/data ubuntu bash

Run Container 2

docker run -it --name container2 -v shared-notes:/opt/data ubuntu bash

View Files

cd /opt/data
ls

Read File

cat shared-note.txt

KEY CONCEPTS LEARNED

Docker Volume

A Docker Volume is a Docker-managed storage location that persists independently of containers.

Shared Storage

Multiple containers can mount the same volume and access the same files.

Data Persistence

Data stored in a volume remains available even after containers are removed and recreated.

Multi-Container Interaction

Containers can communicate indirectly by reading and writing shared files within the same volume.

RESULTS

Successfully shared data between two containers.

Verified that changes made in one container were visible in another container.

Demonstrated Docker volume persistence.

Learned how shared storage works in containerized environments.

SKILLS GAINED

Docker Volumes

Shared Storage

Multi-Container Interaction

Data Persistence

Volume Management

CONCLUSION

This project demonstrated how Docker volumes enable multiple containers to share and access the same data. By using a shared volume, changes made in one container were immediately visible in another, providing practical experience with shared storage and persistent data management in Docker.
